# Arrays

https://www.techinterviewhandbook.org/algorithms/array/

## Definition
Arrays hold values of the same type (typically integers) at contiguous memory locations.

## Characteristics
- We only care about position/index of an element and element
- In Python, JS, Ruby, PHP, the array size is dynamic and we don't need to have size defined beforehand when creating array.
- Most array strategies can be applied to string problems.

## Advantages
- Store multiple elements of the same type with one single variable name
- Accessing elements is fast as long as we have index `O(1)`

## Disadvantages
- Addition and removal of elements into/from middle of array is slow because remaining elements need to be shifted to accommodate the new/missing element.
    - Exception is if position to be inserted/removed is at end of array.
- Certain languages where array size is fixed, array cannot alter its size after initialization. If insertion causes total number of elements to exceed the size, new array has to be allocated and existing elements have to be copied over.
    - Act of creating new array and transferring elements over takes `O(N)`.

## Time Complexities
| Operation | Big-O     | Note      |
| :--------: | :-------: | :-------: |
| Access   | O(1) | |
| Search  | O(n) | |
| Search (sorted array) | O(log(n)) | |
| Insert  | O(n) | Shifts all subsequent elements to right by one |
| Insert (at end)  | O(1) | No other elements need to be shifted |
| Remove  | O(n)    | Shifts all subsequent elements to left by one |
| Remove (at end)  | O(1)    | No other elements need to be shifted |

## Review
1. Clarify if there are duplicate values in the array. Would the presence of duplicate values affect the answer? Does it make the question simpler or harder?
2. When using an index to iterate through array elements, be careful not to go out of bounds.
3. Be mindful of slicing or concatenating arrays in code. Typically, slicing and concatenating subarrays take `O(n)` time. Use start and end indices to demarcate subarray/range where possible

## Corner Cases
- Empty sequence
- Sequence with 1 or 2 elements
- Sequence with repeated elements
- Duplicated values in the sequence

## Techniques
- Sliding window
    - Applies to many subarray/substring problems.
    - In sliding window, two pointers usually move in same direction and never overtake each other.
    - Ensures that each value is only visited at most twice and time complexity is `O(n)`.
- Two pointers
    - Two pointers is more general version of sliding window where pointers can cross each other and can be on different arrays.
    - When given two arrays to process, it is common to have one index per array to traverse/compare both, incrementing one index at a time.
- Traversing from the right
    - Sometimes we cantraverse the array starting from right instead of left.
- Sorting the array
    - See if sorted or not first, if so, interviewer is looking for solution faster than `O(n)`.
- Precomputation
    - Questions where summation or multiplcation of subarray is involved, precomputation using hashing or prefix/suffix sum/product might be useful.
- Index as a hash key
    - Given a sequence and interviewer asks `O(1)` space, maybe use array as hash table. 
- Traversing the array more than once
    - Traversing array twice/thrice is still `O(n)`.
