# Tree

https://www.techinterviewhandbook.org/algorithms/tree/

## Definition
Tree is an abstract data type that represents heirarchical structure with set of connected nodes. Each node in tree can be connected to many children, but must be connected to exactly one parent except for root node with no parent.

## Characteristics
- Undirected and connected acyclic graph (no cycles or loops).
- Recursion can be useful as each node can be like a root node of its own subtree.
- E.g. file systems, JSON, and HTML docs

## Common Terms
- Neighbor: parent or child of a node
- Ancestor: a node reachable by traversing its parent chain
- Descendant: a node in node's subtree
- Degree: number of children of a node
- Degree of a tree: maximum degree of nodes in the tree
- Distance: number of edges along the shortest path between two nodes
- Level/depth: number of edges along the unique path between a node and the root node
- Width: number of nodes in a level

## Binary Tree
- Nodes in binary tree have maximum of two children.

### Binary Tree Terms
- Complete binary tree: binary tree in which every level, except possibly the last is completely filled, and all nodes in last level are as far left as possible.
- Balanced binary tree: binary tree structure in which left and right substrees of every node differ in height by no more than 1.

### Traversals
e.g.
    	   1
    	 /   \
    	7     9
       / \     \
      2   6     9
         / \   /
        5  11 5
- In-order traversal: left -> root -> right
    - Result: 2, 7, 5, 6, 11, 1, 9, 5, 9
- Pre-order traversal: root -> left -> right
    - Result: 1, 7, 2, 6, 5, 11, 9, 9, 5
- Post-order traversal: left -> right -> root
    - Result: 2, 5, 11, 6, 7, 5, 9, 9, 1

### Binary Search Tree (BST)
- In-order traversal of BST will return all elements in order.

### Time Complexity
| Operation | Big-O |
| :--------: | :-------: |
| Access | O(log n) |
| Search | O(log n) |
| Insert | O(log n) |
| Remove | O(log n) |

### Space Complexity
- Traversing balanced trees is `O(h)` where `h` is height of tree, while traversing very skewed trees (essentially a linked list) will be `O(n)`

### Review
1. Write pre-order, in-order, and post-order traversal recursively AND iteratively.

## Corner Cases
- Empty tree
- Single node
- Two nodes
- Very skewed tree (like linked list)

## Common Routines
- Insert value
- Delete value
- Count number of nodes in tree
- Whether value is in tree
- Calculate height of tree
- Binary search tree
    - Determine if it is a binary search tree
    - Get maximum value
    - Get minimum value

## Techniques
- Recursion
    - Notice that subtree problem can be used to solve entire problem.
    - Remember to check for base case, where node is `null`.
    - Sometimes possible that we need to return two values.
- Traversing by level
    - Asked to traverse a tree by level, use breadth-first search.
- Summation of nodes
    - Check whether nodes can be negative.