# Strings

https://www.techinterviewhandbook.org/algorithms/string/

## Definition
Strings are sequence of characters.

## Characteristics
- Trie/Prefix Tree and Suffix Tree are common data structures for looking up strings.
- `Rabin Karp` is common string algorithm for efficiently searching of substring using rolling hash
    - TODO:
- `KMP` is another common string algorithm for efficient searching of substring.
    - TODO:

## Time Complexities
| Operation | Big-O     |
| :--------: | :-------: |
| Access | O(1) |
| Search | O(n) |
| Insert | O(n) |
| Remove | O(n) |

Operations involving another string and assuming other string is length m:
| Operation | Big-O     | Note      |
| :--------: | :-------: | :-------: |
| Find substring | O(n*m) | Most naive case. KMP algorithm is more efficient for string searching. |
| Concatenating strings | O(n+m) | |
| Slice | O(m) | |
| Split (by token) | O(n+m) | |
| Strip (remove leading and trailing whitespaces) | O(n) | |

## Review
1. Ask about input character set and case sensitivity. USually the characters are limited to lowercase characters.

## Corner Cases
- Empty string
- String with 1 or 2 characters
- String with repeated characters
- Strings with only distinct characters

## Techniques
- Counting characters
    - Common way of counting frequency of characters in string is using hash table/map.
        - May use built-in Counter class in Python
    - Common mistake is saying space complexity is `O(n)`, but space required for counter of string of latin characters is `O(1)` because upper bound is range of chars at fix constant of 26.
- String of unique characters
    - Use 26-bit bitmask to count characters in string of unique characters.
    - ```python
        mask = 0
        for c in word:
            mask |= (1 << (ord(c) - ord('a)))
        ```
    - To determine if two strings have common characters, perform & on the two bitmasks. If the result is non-zero, ie. mask_a & mask_b > 0, then the two strings have common characters
- Anagram
    - Sorting both strings should produce same resulting string taking `O(n log n)` time and `O(log n)` space.
    - If mapping each character to prime number and multiply each mapped number together, anagrams should have same multiple taking `O(n)` time and `O(1)` space.
    - Frequency counting of characters help determine if two strings are anagrams with `O(n)` time and `O(1)` space.
- Palindrome
    - Reverse string and should equal itself.
    - Have two pointers at start and end of string. Move pointers inward until they meet. Every point/character should match.