# Linked Lists

https://www.techinterviewhandbook.org/algorithms/linked-list/

## Definition
Linked list used to represent sequential data, but not given physical placement in memory like arrays.

## Characteristics
- Each element contains an address of next element.
- Consists collection of nodes which together represent a sequence.
- Each node contains: data, and reference to next node in sequence.

## Advantages
- Insertion and deletion of node in list (if given location) is `O(1)`.

# Disadvantages
- Access time is linear because directly accessing elements via position in list is not possible, need to traverse from start.

## Types of linked lists
1. Singly linked list
    - Linked list where each node points to next node and last node points to `null`.
2. Doubly linked list
    - Linked list where each node has two pointers, `next` and `prev`.
    - `prev` pointer of first node and `next` pointer of last node point to `null`.
3. Circular linked list
    - Singly linked list where last node points back to first node.
    - Doubly linked list variant is where `prev` pointer of first node points to last node and `next` pointer of last node points to first node.

## Implementation
- Only Java provides linked list implementation.

## Time Complexity
| Operation | Big-O     | Note      |
| :--------: | :-------: | :-------: |
| Access | O(n) |  |
| Search | O(n) |  |
| Insert | O(1) | Assumes we have traversed to insertion position |
| Remove | O(1) | Assumes we have traversed to the node to be removed |

## Common routines
- Counting number of nodes in linked list
- Reversing linked list in-place
- Finding middle node of linked list using fast/slow pointers
- Merging two linked lists together

## Corner cases
- Empty linked list (head is `null`)
- Single node
- Two nodes
- Linked list has cycles
    - Clarify whether there can be cycle in list.

## Techniques
- Sentinel/dummy nodes
    - Adding sentinel/dummy node at head and/or tail might help handle edge cases where operations have to be performed at head or tail.
    - Ensures operations will never be done on head or tail, but remove them at end of operation.
- Two pointers
    - Getting k^th^ from last node - where one is k nodes ahead of other. When node ahead reaches end, other node is k nodes behind.
    - Detecting cycles - one pointer increments twice as much as other, if they meet there is a cycle.
    - Getting middle node - one pointer increments twice as much as other and when faster node reaches end of the list, slower node will be at middle.
- Using space
    - Creating new linked list and adding nodes to new linked list as final result (takes extra space).
- Elegant modification operations
    - Truncate a list - set `next` pointer to `null` at last element.
    - Swapping values of nodes - swap value of two nodes, no need to swap `next` pointer.
    - Combining two lists - attach head of second list to tail of first list.